.. _advanced_topics:

Advanced Topics
===============

The following sections describe advanced usage of the library.

Request Modification Details
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If all checks outlined above pass successfully, the actual endpoint (or next middleware) will be called. To persist the authentication result,
we're using Starlettes :code:`Request` object. The following attributes are added to the request:

**User Object**

The user object is stored in :code:`scope.user` attribute. As the request is passed to further middlewares, dependencies or potentially decorators, the endpoint can access the user information.

**Authorization Scopes**

This example does not contain any scopes, so the :code:`scope.auth` attribute will be an empty list. Refer to the advanced documentation for how to leverate authorization scopes.

Logging
^^^^^^^

Note straight from the `Python Docs <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/logging.html#logging-advanced-tutorial>`_:

.. note:: 
    It is strongly advised that you do not log to the root logger in your library. Instead, use a logger with a unique and easily identifiable name, such as the :code:`__name__` for your library’s top-level package or module. Logging to the root logger will make it difficult or impossible for the application developer to configure the logging verbosity or handlers of your library as they wish.

Also, it is recommended to use module level logging:

.. note::
    A good convention to use when naming loggers is to use a module-level logger, in each module which uses logging, named as follows

This module implements these best practices. 

.. warning::
    Especially during the authorization phase, the user object is included in the log message. Make sure your user object is serializable to a string, otherwise the log message will contain non-helpful strings.

Token Introspection vs Opaque Tokens
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, this library will attempt to validate the JWT signature locally using the public key obtained from Keycloak. This is the recommended way to validate the token, as it does not require any additional requests to Keycloak. Also, Keycloak does not support opaque tokens yet.

If you want to still use the token endpoint to validate the token, you can opt to do so:

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 7

    # Set up Keycloak
    keycloak_config = KeycloakConfiguration(
        url="https://sso.your-keycloak.com/auth/",
        realm="<Realm Name>",
        client_id="<Client ID>",
        client_secret="<Client Secret>",
        use_introspection_endpoint=True
    )

Please make sure to understand the consequences before applying this configuration.

Disabling Token Validation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible to disable token validation altogether. Be aware that this is a security risk pretty much disables
all security features of the library.

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 7

    # Set up Keycloak
    keycloak_config = KeycloakConfiguration(
        url="https://sso.your-keycloak.com/auth/",
        realm="<Realm Name>",
        client_id="<Client ID>",
        client_secret="<Client Secret>",
        validate_token=False
    )

JWT Decoding Options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The upstream project `python-keycloak` uses `JWCrypto` under the hood to verify
JWT tokens. This library uses sensible defaults for the JWT verification, but it is
possible to modify the decode options if needed.

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 6,7,8

    # Set up Keycloak
    keycloak_config = KeycloakConfiguration(
        # ...
        validation_options={
            check_claims = {
                "jti": None,
                "exp": None,
                "iat": None,
            }
        }
    )

Please refer to the `JWCrypto` documentation for the available options:
https://jwcrypto.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jwt.html#jwcrypto.jwt.JWT

Excluding Endpoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You may not want to enforce authentication for all endpoints. For example, you may want to allow anonymous access to the health check endpoint or allow accessing the autogenerated docs and OpenAPI schema without authentication.

There are two ways of doing this.

.. note::
    Both examples can also be combined to achieve more complex setups.

Exclude certain paths
---------------------

The middleware provides a configuration option to exclude certain paths from authentication. Those are compiled as regex and then matched against the request path.

**Example:**

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 12

    excluded_routes = [
        "/status",
        "/docs",
        "/openapi.json",
        "/redoc",
    ]

    app = FastAPI()
    setup_keycloak_middleware(
        app,
        # ...
        exclude_patterns=excluded_routes,
    )

This would make sure you can access the docs, alternate docs, OpenAPI schema and health check endpoint without authentication.

.. warning::
    At the moment only the paths are checked, not the request method or other criteria. See issue `#3 <https://github.com/waza-ari/fastapi-keycloak-middleware/issues/3>`_ for more details.

**Technical Details:**

Under the hood these paths are compiled to regex and then matched against the request path. Each string is passed as-is to :code:`re.compile` and stored, such that it can be used later to patch against the request path.

Use Multiple Applications
-------------------------

Alternatively you can use multiple :code:`FastAPI` applications and mount them to the main application. This way you can have different authentication requirements for different endpoints.

**Example:**

.. code-block:: python

    # This first app is secured
    secured_app = FastAPI()

    setup_keycloak_middleware(
        app,
        # ...
        exclude_patterns=excluded_routes,
    )

    # This second app has no middleware to it and is not protected
    public_app = FastAPI()

    # This is your main app, mounting the other two applications
    app = FastAPI()
    app.mount(path="/secured", app=secured_app)
    app.mount(path="/public", app=public_app)

Device Authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you need to authenticate devices, you can do so in various different ways. We need to distinguish between two different scenarios:

User Devices
------------

These are devices that belong to a certain user. You can use Keycloak `device authorization grant <https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/securing_apps/#device-authorization-grant>`_. The device can start the process by using the Keycloak REST API and show a code to the user. The user then enters this code in Keycloak and authenticates with the user credentials. The device can poll another endpoint and receives a token when the authentication is completed.

You only need to make sure that the same claims are mapped to tokens created by this client compared to the claims normal users would get. For this library there is no difference between those tokens then, so authentication and authorization work as previously described.

Standalone Devices
------------------

**Overview**

It gets a little more complicated if a device is not directly mapped to a user, for example IoT decices you maintain that need to access your API.

While the way how you obtain the token doesn't really matter (could be device code flow as described above or could be Keycloak offline tokens), the user that is used for this matters.

**Keycloak configuration**

One example on how to configure the Keycloak side of things:

1. Create a user in Keycloak that represents the device
2. Create a client for device authentication
3. Create client roles for the devices you need to support and map them to the same claim you use for user roles on your user client
4. Map the device user to client roles of the device client

You can now obtain a refresh token on either using the device flow or my leveraging offline sessions and the device can use them to obtain an access token if it needs to perform requests against the API.

.. note::
    This by no means is the only way to do this. Keycloak is very flexible, you'll need to find the configuration that fits your needs.

**Library configuration**

Depending on your user handling within the API, you may need to take additional steps. If you also create the device users within your API environment and the user mapper can map them as normal, you don't need to take additonal steps. If you don't want to create these users within the API, this library has options to configure how to behave in case the user does not exist.

The default behavior is to fail authentication if the built-in or user-defined user mapper cannot return a user. For device authentication, it is possible to add a specific claim to the access token which tells the library that this is a device requesting access.

The following example shows the configurtion on the library side:

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 7,8

    # Set up Keycloak
    keycloak_config = KeycloakConfiguration(
        url="https://sso.your-keycloak.com/auth/",
        realm="<Realm Name>",
        client_id="<Client ID>",
        client_secret="<Client Secret>",
        enable_device_authentication=True,
        device_authentication_claim="is_device",
    )

This tells the library to enable the aforementioned behavior. It will now:

1. The access token signature and validity will be checked as usual
2. Check if the claim :code:`is_device` is present in the access token
3. If it is present, it will evaluate the value of the claim. If it is a truthy value (``bool(value) === True``), continue, otherwise fail authentication
4. The remaining steps (claim extraction, user mapping, authorization scope mapping) will be skipped

If the claim is not present in the access token, the library will behave as usual and try normal user authentication.

.. note::
    To add the claim to your token, you can either use a ``Hardcoded claim`` mapper or any other method you prefer.

Websocket Support
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We can also inspect websocket connection requests and validate the token using the same mechanisms. Websockets do not support the same headers, therefore we have to use cookies instead.
Websocket support is enabled by default, but can be disabled by setting the :code:`enable_websocket_support` parameter to :code:`False`.

If enabled, the initial websocket connection request will be validated, subsequent messages within the same socket won't be affected.
The cookie is expected to be named :code:`access_token` and contain the JWT token prefixed with :code:`Bearer`.

Request Injection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::
   This section contains technical details about the implementation within the library and is not required to use the library. Feel free to skip it.

The decorator used to enforce permissions requires to have access to the Request object, as the middleware stores the user information and compiled permissions there.

FastAPI injects the request to the path function, if the path function declares the request parameter. If its not provided by the user, the request would normally not be passed and would therefore not be available to the decorator.

This would end up in some code like this:

.. code-block:: python

    @app.get("/users/me")
    @require_permission("user:read")
    def read_users_me(request: Request): # pylint: disable=unused-argument
        return {"user": "Hello World"}

Not only would this require unneccessary imports and blow up the path function, it would also raise a warning for an unused variable which then would need to be suppressed.

To avoid this, the decorater uses a somewhat "hacky" way to modify the function signature and include the request parameter. This way, the user does not need to declare the request parameter and the decorator can still access it.

Lateron, before actually calling the path function, the request is removed from :code:`kwargs` again, to avoid an exception being raised for an unexpected argument.

Details can be found in `PEP 362 - Function Signature Object <https://peps.python.org/pep-0362/#signature-object>`_. Consider the following code:

.. code-block:: python

    # Get function signature
    sig = signature(func)

    # Get parameters
    parameters: OrderedDict = sig.parameters
    if "request" in parameters.keys():
        # Request is already present, no need to modify signature
        return wrapper

    # Add request parameter by creating a new parameter list based on the old one
    parameters = [
        Parameter(
            name="request",
            kind=Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD,
            default=Parameter.empty,
            annotation=starlette.requests.Request,
        ),
        *parameters.values(),
    ]

    # Create a new signature, as the signature is immutable
    new_sig = sig.replace(parameters=parameters, return_annotation=sig.return_annotation)
    
    # Update the wrapper function signature
    wrapper.__signature__ = new_sig
    return wrapper

The request is still passed to the path function if defined by the user, otherwise its removed before calling the path function.
